with General Joe Hanover. Today's date is 29 of
July, 1980. This is part of the project of Aggies to
General. This is Terry Anderson. This is a test.
This is an interview with Brigadier General Joe G.
Hanover. Today is Tuesday, July 29th. This is
Terry Anderson. Let's start with your upbringing
and your parents. You were born in McGregor,
Texas, February 10, 1918. Could you tell me about
your father? Well, my father was Grady Hanover,
which I've taken my middle name from. In fact, I'm a
junior. My father was a hardworking laborer in
McGregor, Texas. part owner of a cotton gin and
also in a grain elevator type operation which
serviced the local economy down there in McLennan
County he worked hard at this gin which everybody
does it is seasonal very seasonal and I don't
remember a great deal about the early years in
McGregor because I left there when I was seven
years old. The cause of our leaving was my father's
gin burned and he and his partner I'm sure owed a
good bit of money on it and according to my father he
told his partner that if he would take the
assumption of the debt and take the insurance that
was available and just free him that he would turn
his part over to him. And then his father lived in
Wheelock, Texas, which is just north of Bryan or
northeast of Bryan. So your grandfather did.
That's right, my grandfather. And he was getting
to the point that he needed someone to help him with
his farm. He had about a 1,400-acre farm that had
cattle and sharecroppers. So my father moved to
Wheelock in 1925. to assist his father with the
operation of the cattle farm and the sharecropper
farming and that's how we got down back down in this
area. My father was a hard-working fellow and he
raised us four children. I'm the oldest of four. I
have two brothers and one sister and we lived on
this farm for many, many years, in fact, until I
started to A&M. My mother was a very devout
Christian lady who gave all of us the loving,
tender care that a mother should and provided the
type of home life that you think you should grow up
in. She and my father had a very wholesome
household, and we think we were very fortunate in
the heritage that we had. Now, does your heritage
in Texas go way back into the 1900s or before? Oh,
yes, before that. I mean the 1800s. Yeah, let me. My
great-grandfather came to Texas in the 1830s from
the Maine area.
His parents had migrated from England. the name
Hanover started in Germany went to England and
then I guess it's my great-great-grandparents my
great-great-grandfather came from England to
Maine he was in the Navy in the English Navy the
story is that he retired of the Navy and jumped
overboard and walked ashore swam ashore or
something but anyhow that up in the Maine and
Massachusetts area But he came to Texas in 1835,
1836, somewhere in the middle 1800s. He was a
surveyor, and he came this way following the
railroads and doing survey work. So where my
heritage goes. About the time of the Texas
Revolution. That's right, to the early 1800s.
Now, when you say that your mother was religious,
Was she more religious than your father? And what
religion was it? My mother was a Baptist.
My father never really belonged to any church, per
se. He was a kind and loving father, but he just
never saw fit to be a member of the church. My mother
was, but they still had a very wholesome
relationship. Could you tell me about your
mother's heritage? Yes, in fact, my mother was
born at Allen Farm. You know where Allen Farm is?
It's about 15 miles south of College Station, down
in Brazos County. The Moore brothers have big
farms down there at this particular time. But she
was born right here in Brazos County, in the lower
part of the county.
When she was very young, her mother and father
moved to Belton, but they were in Texas. I think her
father was born here, but I'm not real sure about
that. But they had been here for a good few years.
Okay.
If your mother was religious, did religion play a
large role in your upbringing? Yes. Some of my
earliest memories of the church my mother was a
pianist she played the church yes and i've told the
in fact the preacher that was our our preacher
there at that in mcgregor at that time has died
within the last year here in bryan and i've told him
many times my early remembrance of church is
laying on the bench behind the piano because my
mother put me there while she played, but my father
used to say every time the doors of the church
opened my mother was there, but we were all taught
that we needed to be in church and Sunday school on
Sunday, so my mother usually had us there. Could
you tell me about your parents' education? My
mother had little formal education. She was
fortunate enough to go to Baylor, Mary Hardin
Baylor in Belton, which was a girls' school at that
time. And I think for a year or some such thing that
I'm sure finances kept her from going to school.
But somewhere down the line, she learned to play
the piano and was quite a musician and taught music
many years later on. My father had formal
education of a business school which was pretty
prevalent during those times back there. He went
to a business school in Waco and- Did he go to high-
did he finish high school and then go to a business
school? I'm sure it was about a 10th grade high
school or some such thing but they called it high
school. He finished what was available out in the
rural area which was probably in the 10th grade or
some such thing and then took a business college
business course so that was the extent of his
formal education. Uh could you tell me about uh how
would you characterize your father I mean you say
he's hard working could you
continue on that thing? Well What kind of person
was he?
He was a fellow that was very concerned about the
welfare of his family.
His many years that I knew him and beginning with
this work at the gin and this grain elevator in
McGregor he personally was there to see that the
work was being done the employees that worked for
him he was always there to be helpful and tell them
what he expected. Of course out on the farm it was
basically he and we boys plus the sharecroppers
who back in those days if the farm owner owned the
teams and tools the sharecroppers worked on the
hay. if the sharecroppers had their own teams and
tools they worked on what they called third and
fourth they got a third of the cotton and a fourth of
the corn a lesser amount because they I mean a more
amount because they finished their own equipment
but my dad was up early he uh he tried to instill in us
the necessity for being diligent and dependable
and know how to work even though we were not the Red
Winners. We had our chores. We had to bring the wood
in and we had to milk the cows and we had to feed the
horses and, you know, the farm type chores, but he
expected us to do our part and... He put
responsibility on you early then? He did, yes. In
fact, I started milking cows or helping milk when I
was seven years old. and uh but he gave us the chores
and he wasn't one of these that stand right over you
know and tell you everything to do but he'd tell you
what he expected and the end product and then if you
didn't get it well you know he'd talk to you but he he
could be a pretty stern when he needs to be I
don't remember being punished by him very many
times, but the time he did, well, you know, he
didn't laugh at all.
No. He was a disciplinarian when it came to the
parents. My mother, I guess typical of boys, they
always thought their mothers were joking. He was
the authority in the family then? Well, that's
probably right. As far as you know, what had to be
done, and if there was some law laid down, well, he
was the one that did it. My mother was kind and
gentle, and she might give you a little switching
of the peach limb, but that wasn't the way it was,
and Daddy did it. Yeah, right. And you tell me about
the sharecroppers that you mentioned. How many
sharecroppers did you have? Well, I look back on it
now and I really don't see how they did it. These
1,400 acres that they had, there were probably,
I'd say, 300 acres that were cultivation. The rest
of it was grass and they ran cattle on it. But I can
remember one time there were 12 families that were
sharecroppers on that 300 acres. And that sounds
incredible. I just don't know. But a lot of them is
one colored family that all seem like they must
have eight or 10 children. Think about where they
all black, all the sharecroppers. But to think
about 12 families making their living on these 300
couldn't have been over 400 or 400 acres. But I just
it's just almost incredible. My father, operated
a little commissary farm that's a little store
that where they provided the beans and coffee and
flour and this sort of thing and the sharecroppers
reimbursed them in the fall. and their crops were
gathered. So really it was a sort of a little store
on a credit farm. They got their staple goods
there. And there was one thing that I guess helped a
little. Most of those sharecroppers, my father
would let them raise pigs or chickens or maybe
raise a cow or two around their home. So it wasn't
totally from the land, I mean from the cultivation
that they made their living. so where they were
enterprising sharecroppers they had an
opportunity to grow a lot of what they eat. How long
did sharecroppers last? How long did you own the
farm and did they last? Well the farm was owned
clear up until 1942 and my grandfather had
acquired this 1400 acres over the years by 100
acres and 200 and you know put together this 1400
acres over, I would say probably a good many years,
but I know that he had owned a lot of it since the
early 1900s. So he had started acquiring it back in
the 1800s and it was finally sold in 1942. But the
sharecroppers had begun to dwindle prior to their
selling and he had turned most of that into
grazing. where you could just raise stock. Why'd
they do them though? They went to town. They went to
places and got jobs. Just the same thing that
countrywide people have left the farm. Yeah,
right. Looking for an easier life. Must have been a
tough life for those people. And they worked hard.
Of course, they'd get up, you know, they were in the
fields when daylight came. They were in the fields
to dark. That's just what it took. Yeah.
Could you tell me about your two brothers and one
sister? How'd you get along with them? Well, what
were their ages? Let's start with that first, and
then how'd you get along with them? The next
brother under me is two years younger than I am. and
the brother under him is five years younger than
he, which is seven years younger than I am, and then
her sister was four years younger than the third
brother, so we were within an 11 year span.
Oh, I guess we had the usual differences the
brothers did. Generally, we got along well. We had
our little spats and arguments and whatnot. It was
real strange. We also had a cousin, a first cousin,
who was orphaned. And my grandfather took him in to
raise him. And he was a year older than I. And it's
real strange. We three boys would have our
arguments and differences. But when we had
arguments with the cousins, the three of us pooled
together. But we had quite an interesting
upbringing. And we had a bunch of other cousins
that lived out in the rural area, and we'd get
together and just have great times. So I'd say we
were average congenial and had on well. Of course,
we were all real proud when her little sister came
home. We said she was spoiled and petted and
whatnot, but we had a pretty congenial family.
What happened to your two brothers? What did they
do in later life? Well, the second oldest went to
A&M for a couple three years, dropped out. He
changed courses a time or two and got behind, I
guess, his other constituents and so he dropped
out and and went to work and subsequently went in
the service he was an armor soldier got a
battlefield commission was uh when was this
during the war he was he got his battlefield
commission on in December of 45, which was right in
the height of the last phases of the war. 44. You're
right. 44, of course. 44. December 44. And got a
battlefield commission, and shortly
thereafter, he was in a tank that got three German
88 shells through it. three of the five out of the
tank were killed and he fortunately was not killed
but was severely wounded and lost an eye and had
shrapnel all over him and got superficial burns
not you know something detrimental to him and was
brought back to the states for recovery and then he
subsequently went in law enforcement but as a
deputy sheriff here in this county and still lives
here in brian The second brother, who was the
youngest of all of us, was the first one in the
service, the first one in the war. He left high
school and joined the Navy. Really? He got in
before you did? That's right. That's real
strange. Yeah, that is. Well, let me take that
back. He got in the combat area before I left. Oh, I
see. He went in, he must have gone in in 42. I was
actually in the service, but I was in the States
training soldiers. But he had the good fortune of
serving on the battleship New Jersey. that was the
flagship of Spruance and Halsey and whatnot and he
was a fire control NCO or a fire control technician
right and I had a very I would I would guess a very
interesting World War II service of course he's in
the Pacific most of the time but service on those
big battle wagons must have been much better than
the dog faces laying in the trenches but he stayed
in fact he went in I guess he was he was only about 17
or 18 when he went in so he was in the new on the New
Jersey throughout the entire he went to I guess
Norfolk or somewhere over there where it was
actually built and went on it from Shakedown
Cruise. So he was on it from its maiden voyage right
on to the time he got this church out of service.
And then the sister uh what did he do later in life?
Uh he he came back to this area and uh he went in the
lumber business. Oh really? He first traveled and
sold lumber for a good many years for a big concern
out of San Antonio and then decided that he could
sell to other people except himself so a number of
years later he actually went into the lumber
business and has his own business now and has had it
for a number of years in Austin. Oh really? Which
one is it? It's called Hanover Lumber Company. In
Austin? It's uh well it's out to the east of Austin
but it's had a very interesting career in the
business for himself. He has four children and
three of them work with him in the business. That's
sort of interesting.
And the sister went to Texas University, got her
degree and went to Corpus, I mean went to... What
was her degree? Education. She was a school
teacher. Went down to Port Arthur. and went into
the school system down there and met a young man who
was working for Guff Oil Company and they were
married subsequently and she taught a year or two
and then she became a housewife. So she's
continued living in Port Arthur ever since. The
youngest brother, the one who went in the Navy,
never did go to college. So there really were three
of us, two of us graduated the second and had a
limited amount of college work. Now there must
have been some episodes earlier in your life that
you feel had sort of a significant impact on your
later life or your career. Were there? Yes, and
it's real funny I think, I hear so many people talk
about They never didn't know what they wanted to do
until they actually got out of school or even
halfway through college. I had a specific college
career in mind before I got out of high school.
Really? That is unusual. Well long before that in
1929 and at that time I was 11 years old The Old San
Antonio Road, which is the borderline between
these two counties. Are you familiar with what
road that is? It's about halfway from here to
Hearn. Is that Old Service Road or OSR now? That's
right. The OSR. Is that? I've been on that road. Is
that? That's what it is. What is it? OSR? Old San
Antonio Road. Old San Antonio? I just thought it
said for Old Service Road. Old San Antonio. Old San
Antonio Road. It was called in the Spanish times El
Camino Real but later became what you call the old
San Antonio. It was San Antonio to Nacogdoches
Trail. Sure sure which was one of the oldest.
That's right. In fact it's built in the 1700s. Way
back way back yeah and our home was was adjacent to
that. It followed our property for about two
miles. A little side issue you're talking about
OSR that's the only road in the state of Texas
that's referred to by that type of designation
every other is a number but it is OSR officially but
we lived on this road in 1929 the highway
department undertook to regrade it gravel it and
put a surface on it in other words make a highway out
of it And I got fascinated with the survey crew that
was doing the survey work on that road and said to my
people and everybody, I want to be a civil
engineer. That was 11 years old. I graduated from
high school, went to A&M, enrolled in civil
engineering and got a degree. So when I was 11 years
old, I said what I was going to take in college and
did it. And that's a little unusual. And basically
it was because you were stimulated right there on
the road. I followed that survey crew as far as I
could walk, you know, and then come back home, but
just was fascinated with them. Why do you think
that was? Because, you know, kids see firemen who
are 11 and say, gee, I'd like to be a fireman when I
grow up, or they, you know, they might see an
engineer crew, or they might see a number of, they
might see a man in uniform and say, I'd love to be a
general. Why do you think that was? I really don't
know. It just, just one of those things that, that
the work they were doing, and then the subsequent
work that followed it, building that road, I
stayed out there just, days upon the end, you know,
and it was crude as compared to today's methods.
Sure. Mule-drawn scrapers. Were they? Yes, sir.
Mule-drawn scrapers. They had some mechanical
tractors, I mean tractors with motors and
whatnot, but most of the dirt work was done with
mule-drawn scrapers, and that fascinated me. And
I knew it all started with this survey crew. That's
just the kind of thing I wanted to do. Did you talk to
any of the workers? Oh, gosh, I was just right in
their hair. We even provided a place for them to
board their mules and horses. My father provided a
corral where they could come up at night as long as
they were within commuting distance, you know,
long, within a three or four mile area. He'd
provide them a corral and a place for them to keep
their feed and they could water and bed down their
work animals at night. And further than that, And
he provided them an area to put their tent up where
they could stay. See, they lived in tents at that
time because they couldn't commute anywhere. It
was too far. And my mother boarded these road
hands, fed them for a price, you know. She fed them
for weeks at a time. And, you know, gosh, I thought
they'd made for me. and I talked with them and lived
with them and I'd go down their tent at night and
we'd sit around and they'd tell me the biggest bull
story, you know. So it's just... What kind of
people were they? Just, just across the board
laborers. There were, there were, there were some
whites, some blacks. They worked an integrated
crew then? Oh yes, oh yes. And just, just real
down-to-earth, hard-working people that were
trying to make a living. And as I say, they'd be gone
from home a week at a time. They'd come out there and
stay all week, live in this tent. My mother would
feed them, and on weekends, they'd pull five of
them and get them all day forward and commute back
to wherever their home was and spend the day with
their folks and then come back. So I guess it just
ingrained it in me, I don't know. But the
construction aspect of it just didn't seem to suit
me.
It seems to me that you and your two brothers and
sister all have had successful careers. In which
ways do you think that your parents are
responsible for that? Well, when I got ready to go
to A&M, my father told me, he said, I do not have the
financial means to send you to A&M. See, I started
in 1936, which was just coming out of the
Depression. But he said, I'll tell you what I can
do. He said, you can stay at home. I can board you. I
can provide you with food and a place to live if you
can find some way to commute back and forth. My
grandfather had an old 1929 Chevrolet. He told me,
he said, if you can get enough people to ride with
you to help pay your expenses, I was sort of
mechanically inclined. He said, I believe you
could keep the old car up, and you can take that car
and use it if you can commute back and forth and use
it for your transportation. Well, I did. I got
people that were interested in going back for it.
Some of them were students. Some of them worked at
A&M. Triple A was in B&M. That was part of the
agriculture program. And I always had a load of
people that wanted to go. And I'd gather them up in
the morning after I milked seven cows, gather them
up, head to A&M. go to school all day, and I worked. I
worked for the landscape department on the
grounds. Doing anything I had to do. I picked
mealybugs off the chrysanthemums, I dug in the
flowerbeds, I hauled compost out of the Calvary
stables. You know, whatever there was to do, I was
ready, because I wanted to go to school. And I got 30
cents an hour. And I was allowed to work. Which was
above minimum wage actually. I think it was. It
was. The first minimum wage went in in 37 and that
was only 25 cents an hour. Well we were paid. Or 38,
1938. Well we were getting 30 at that time and I was
allowed to work 40 hours a month. A day student
could work 40 hours a month. That's right. And that
gave me $12 a month. And that made the difference in
homeschool. Had I not gotten that $12 a month, I
couldn't have made it. Because that brought my
little books and paper and pencils and whatnot.
And I owned one cow that my grandfather had given
me. She had one calf a year. And I sold that calf in
time each year to pay my $50 or whatever it was for
the... what do you call it